Title: From Gay-Lussac to the 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
Date: 2013-09-27 11:20
Author: gavin
Category: Writing
Tags: chemistry, history, showing off
Slug: from-gay-lussac-to-the-1998-nobel-prize-for-chemistry-2
Status: published

One of the members of my current research group is defending her
master's thesis next week and as I was reading through her thesis, I was
reminded of my favourite part of my own thesis. In the introductory
chapter, I wrote a brief description of the development of the modern
field of computational chemistry. More than a year later, these four
paragraphs remain some of my favourite writing to date, so I wanted I'd
share it with the world here.<!--more-->

The ability to predict chemical phenomena and reaction outcomes using
mathematical rules was a goal of many early chemists. Some of the
foremost chemists of the late 18th and early 19th centuries, like
Antoine Lavoisier, John Dalton, Joseph Gay-Lussac, and Amedeo Avogadro,
worked to study chemistry in a more quantitative fashion than their
predecessors, and in fact many of their contemporaries. Gay-Lussac was
optimistic that their work would come to fruition when he wrote, in a
contribution to Mémoires de Physique et de Chimie de la
Société d'Arcueil, in 1809, "...we are perhaps not far removed from the
time when we shall be able to submit the bulk of chemical phenomena to
calculation." Through the 19th century, work on thermodynamics and
chemical kinetics, much of which was built on the work of Gay-Lussac and
his colleagues, led to a new branch of chemistry known as physical
chemistry, which applied the concepts of physics to the study of
chemistry.

Although physical chemistry introduced new levels of quantitative study
to the world of chemistry, it was primarily focused on analysing
phenomena in the bulk. With the advent of both atomic and quantum
theory, it became desirable, and indeed possible, to study chemistry on
the molecular and atomic scales. The work of Erwin Schrödinger
introduced a mathematical model for the interactions of electrons and
nuclei in atomic systems and marked the beginning of modern electronic
structure theory. Unfortunately, the solutions for Schrödinger's
equation become exceptionally complex for large systems, so it took some
time before his work could be realistically applied to the vast majority
of chemical problems. Through the mid to late twentieth century, the
development of theoretical methods that allowed chemists to solve
accurate approximations of the Schrödinger equation for large molecular
systems, in conjunction with rapid advances in computing power, led to
the introduction of computational chemistry. This work was acknowledged
with the 1998 Nobel prize in chemistry awarded to Walter Kohn and John
Pople for their contributions to the development of density-functional
theory and computational methods in quantum chemistry, respectively.

In the early days of computational chemistry, electronic structure
calculations on a single diatomic molecule could constitute an entire
doctoral thesis; however, with today's advances in the theoretical
methods and computing power available, these same calculations can be
performed on a desktop computer in seconds and have been incorporated
into undergraduate chemistry curricula. Highly accurate calculations on
systems containing a few dozen atoms have become routine in chemistry
research and the maximum size of systems that can be studied is
constantly increasing.

Computational chemistry provides a new way to study chemistry; in the
view of some, it achieves the lofty vision of Gay-Lussac. With
computational chemistry, one can model discrete molecules or infinitely
repeating materials and learn about specific interactions in chemical
systems that can be very difficult, or even impossible, to study using
traditional experimental chemistry techniques. It is particularly useful
for the study of chemicals that are dangerous or simply malodorous, as
is the case for the compounds in the work presented here, as one can
learn a great deal without needing to come in physical contact with
them. Computational studies are increasingly used in chemical research
to probe a chemical process of interest quickly before expending
resources to study potentially unfavourable reactions, synthesising
expensive compounds, or investigating unexpected experimental results.
