Title: The Significance of Ignorance
Date: 2014-09-14 16:49
Author: gavin
Category: Books, Ramblings, Research
Tags: ignorance, jobs, philosophizing, research
Slug: the-significance-of-ignorance
Status: published

> Please describe what you consider your most significant accomplishment
> as a research scientist.

This seemingly simple question posed on a job application I completed
recently had me stumped when I first came across it. What in my seven
year research career has been my most significant accomplishment? I
haven't done anything that will be earning me a Nobel Prize or a paper
in Science or Nature\*. That isn't to say that I haven't done any
interesting research – I would argue that my work has generally been
quite interesting – just that no single project stands out as my
greatest accomplishment.<!--more-->

By chance, I had read [Ignorance, How It Drives
Science]{style="text-decoration: underline;"} by [Professor Stuart
Firestein](http://bioweb.biology.columbia.edu/firestein/?page_id=8), a
book about the role that ignorance plays in scientific research. Prof.
Firestein's argument is that while the media and most courses portray
science as the pursuit and collection of facts, it is ignorance (that
is, the things we don't know) that drives science research. He likens
the research process to searching for a black cat in a dark room and we
aren't even sure if there is a cat in the room. To continue with the
metaphor, once we exhaust the search of the dark room, whether we found
a cat or not in that room isn't the most important discovery, but
instead the other dark rooms it leads us to. More plainly, what drives
scientific research isn't the facts that are uncovered in a particular
project, but the new areas we learn we don't understand (or to use Prof.
Firestein's terminology, the ignorance we generate). While all
scientific research should answer a question (or at least attempt to),
it should also create new questions out of the things it has uncovered.

While I had previously thought about the new questions that are posed by
my research, I tended to focus instead on the questions that it
answered. Obviously, clearly describing the questions answered is
important when sharing research results with your colleagues; if you
can't do that no one else will be able to use your work, let alone
understand it. However, thinking more broadly of a project as a whole, I
believe it is valuable to look at research projects through the lens of
what unknowns they have uncovered and what new questions are posed.

After some thought, I realised that I already knew the answer for this
application. Looking back at the research projects I have participated
in, the one that generated the most ignorance was my doctoral thesis. In
fact, it created enough questions that I spent nearly five pages
outlining them in my concluding chapter (although I called it “Future
Work” at the time). In retrospect, I think that this is part of the
reason I enjoyed that project as much as I did. I had reached a point
that seemed like a logical place to stop and write up the work, but I
never felt like I had completed the project. There was always a list of
things that I could do to continue the research and despite working on
it for more than four years, the list never got shorter. This, I think,
is the essence of Prof. Firestein's theory; as I worked on this project,
it wasn't the facts I collected that drove the research, but the
ignorance I uncovered.

 

[\* Although when my PhD supervisor presented my research at a
conference, one of the editors from the then new Nature Chemistry
journal found it significant enough to ask him to write about it for
their “]{style="line-height: 1.5;"}[In Your
Element](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchem.1076)[”
column.]{style="line-height: 1.5;"}
