---
layout: post
title: Why can't everything be in the gas phase?
author: Gavin
slug: gas-phase
---

If you talk to any chemist, they will tell you the importance of solvent
in chemistry. The majority of reactions, especially those in research
and used to produce commercial products, take place in the solution
phase. It is rare to encounter reactions that are done purely in gas or
solid phase. Any article or seminar about organic synthesis will tell
you how a reaction works in this solvent but not that one.

Unfortunately, it is quite difficult to model solvent effects using
computational chemistry methods. At their most basic, most computational
models assume that the system exists at zero kelvin (which is a
different problem entirely) in a vacuum. This makes it quite difficult
to account for solvent effects. You could simply add solvent molecules
to your model system. However, this is generally impractical if you are
doing any sort of electronic structure theory calculations, since it can
take dozens or hundreds of solvent molecules to achieve complete
solvation of a relatively small molecule.
<!--more-->

The most basic way to introduce solvent to your calculations is implicit
solvent models. There are a number of ways to do this, but the one I'm
most familiar with is the self-consistent reaction field (SCRF) method.
This method places the model system in a cavity within a dielectric
medium and assigns charges to surface of the cavity. It then uses the
electric field produced by the charges to polarize the electron density
of Â the model system approximating the electronic effects of solvent.
Although this doesn't completely reproduce solvent effects, it can
significantly improve some calculations. The canonical example for this
is the alpha amino acids. A standard gas phase calculation predicts that
the neutral amino acid is the most stable form. However, when applying
an implicit solvent model, the zwitterionic form (with the amine
protonated and carboxylic acid deprotonated) is more stable, reproducing
experiment. In my own research, applying an implicit solvent model
(usually for an aqueous environment) to a reaction will stabilise
reactant, product, and transition state structures leading to an overall
reduction of the predicted energy barrier by at least 5-10 kJ/mol.

Unfortunately, as alluded to earlier, implicit solvent models are not
always sufficient to capture the most important solvent effects in a
reaction. In my PhD research, I encountered two instances where
inclusion of explicit solvation was required, in one case to
dramatically stabilise the transition state and in the other the
transition state could not be isolated without the solvent molecules
included.

Early on in my PhD program, I was studying the reduction of hydrogen
peroxide by organoselenium antioxidants. One of the organoselenium
compounds I examined was a diselenide that reacted with the peroxide to
form water and Se-O double bond, as shown below.

{% include image.html
    img="assets/img/diMe3amineRxn.jpg"
    title="Chemical reaction of deselenide antioxidant with H2O2"
    caption="Reaction of the Diselenide Antioxidant with Hydrogen Peroxide" %}

Experimental reaction kinetics suggested that this was a one-step
reaction, so I was trying to find a one-step reaction path. I was able
to isolate a transition state that showed a concerted reaction with a
proton transfer from one oxygen to the other occurring simultaneously
with the formation of the Se-O bond. It had a very large energy barrier
of 115 kJ/mol, significantly higher than any other antioxidant I
modelled in this study. Because of the high barrier, I thought that
maybe the transition state was stabilised by hydrogen bonding from the
solvent, which experimentally is either water or methanol. I iteratively
added a few water molecules to the reaction site and reoptimised the
reaction path.

The first water added forms a hydrogen bond the the oxygen that is
bonding to the selenium centre. This disappointingly increased the
energy barrier by about 8 kJ/mol. With the addition of a second water,
the energy barrier dropped to 73 kJ/mol. Examining the structure showed
that this water molecule did more than simply hydrogen bond to the
peroxide, it acts as a proton shuttle for the hydrogen transfer turning
the three-centre transition state into a four-centre one, which is much
more stable. A third water molecule added to the model again hydrogen
bonds to the other peroxide oxygen, further stabilising the system,
giving it an energy barrier of 34 kJ/mol.

A couple of years later, I was now studying the regeneration of the
oxidised organoselenium antioxidants, in the form of a selenenic acid
(RSe-OH) using thiols (published [here](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ct300622r)). This reaction
proceeds via a two-step process, first one thiol reacts with
organoselenium molecule, forming a selenylsulfide bond and liberating
water. Then a second thiol reacts, forming a disulfide and the reduced
selenol (RSeH). In a, perhaps foolish, attempt to avoid requiring the
inclusion of solvent, I first modelled this reaction using a
deprotonated thiolate to attack the selenenic acid, with a hydroxide
liberated rather than water. As one would expect, this had a huge energy
barrier of 175 kJ/mol due, at least in part, to the unsuitability of
hydroxide as a leaving group.

I relented and attempted to find a transition state for the reaction
using the thiol. Trying to isolate a reaction path analogous to the one
described above for the diselenide, with simultaneous Se-S bond
formation and hydrogen transfer, was unsuccessful. However, after adding
two water molecules to the model, a low-energy reaction with identified
with both water molecules acting as proton shuttles to facilitate the
hydrogen transfer. Following the complete reaction path shows that the
three proton transfers are not concerted, but instead follow a "cascade"
pattern with the first triggering the second and the second triggering
the third, demonstrated in the animation below. This reaction has a
barrier of between 40-50 kJ/mol depending on the thiol used.

{% include image.html
    img="assets/img/ProtonShuttle.gif"
    title="Animation of the Proton Shuttle"
    caption="Proton Shuttles - If you don't see animation, try clicking on the image." %}

