Title: About Me
Date: 2013-09-13 15:43
Author: gavin
Slug: about-me
Status: published

Hi and welcome to the Quantum Geranium. My name is Gavin. I have a
doctorate in computational chemistry and a passion for sharing things I
find interesting (especially science). This little corner of the
internet is an opportunity for me to do just that by sharing work I have
done and thoughts I have.

Now, I am using my background in academic research and computational
modelling to work in industry as a data scientist. I enjoy
building automated systems to do the tedious parts of my work for me and
finding creative ways to visualize data and research results.

If you are interested in the science I've done, you can find a full list
of my published work over on my
[bibliography](http://www.quantumgeranium.com/bibliography/ "Bibliography").
I'm sure you can find references to my work sprinkled throughout the
posts here as well. I've released some small utility scripts I wrote to
assist with my research under the Simplified BSD license, so check them
out under the [shared
code](http://www.quantumgeranium.com/shared-code/ "Shared Code")
section.

I am currently looking for work outside academia to apply the skills
I've collected to new challenges. If you want to talk about that, I
heartily encourage you to contact me!

You can email me at gavin &lt;you know what to put here&gt;
quantumgeranium.com

I tweet [@gavin\_h\_c](https://twitter.com/gavin_h_c), share code on
Github as [ghevcoul](https://github.com/ghevcoul), and am on
[LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/profile/view?id=280215745). You can
view my resume
[here](http://www.quantumgeranium.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Gavin-Heverly-Coulson-Resume.pdf).

Since you bravely made it to the end of this page, here's a picture of
me on what my geologist friends tell me is technically known as a very
large rock.

[![GavinRock](http://www.quantumgeranium.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/GavinRock-278x300.jpg){.aligncenter
.size-medium .wp-image-176 width="278"
height="300"}](http://www.quantumgeranium.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/GavinRock.jpg)
