Title: Bibliography
Date: 2013-11-22 18:01
Author: gavin
Slug: bibliography
Status: published

Here you will find a collection of the papers and other work I have
published, in reverse chronological order.

### **Doctoral thesis**

[Computational Model of the Catalytic Cycle of Organoselenium
Antioxidants](http://hdl.handle.net/10222/15141)

The culmination of four and a half years of work at Dalhousie
University. I examined the catalytic cycle of a class of small
organoselenium antioxidants (the benzylamine selenols) which mimic the
behaviour of the glutathione peroxidase selenoenzyme.

### Peer-Reviewed Articles

-   [Dramatic Substituent Effects on the Mechanisms of Nucleophilic
    Attacks on Se-S
    Bridges](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jcc.23417)[, ]{style="line-height: 1.5;"}*Journal
    of Computational Chemistry*[, 2013]{style="line-height: 1.5;"}

A follow up study to the one listed below. Here we studied nucleophilic
attack by fluoride and cyanide on mixed selenium-sulfur bridges. We
characterized the reactions with four different substituents (-CH~3~,
-NH~2~, -OH, and -F) at each end of the chalcogen-chalcogen bond.

-   [Revealing unexpected mechanisms for nucleophilic attack on S-S and
    Se-Se bridges](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/chem.201203328),
    *Chemistry - A European Journal*, 2013

In this paper, we studied bond cleavage reactions of disulfide and
diselenide bridges after nucleophilic attack by fluoride or cyanide.
Interestingly, we found that with more electronegative substituents on
the chalcogen atoms, it is the chalcogen-substituent bond that is broken
after nucleophilic attack rather than the chalcogen-chalcogen bond.

-   [Mechanism of the Reduction of an Oxidized Glutathione Peroxidase
    Mimic with Thiols](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ct300622r), *Journal of
    Chemical Theory and Computation*, 2012

After previously studying the oxidation of a selenol-based antioxidant
to a selenenic acid, in this work we examined the reaction of the acid
with a thiol to form a selenylsulfide. This is analogous to the second
step in the proposed glutathione peroxidase enzymatic cycle.

-   [Reaction of Group 16 Analogues of Ethoxyquin with Hydrogen
    Peroxide, a Computational
    Study](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comptc.2011.11.047),
    *Computational and Theoretical Chemistry*, 2012

This is the result of work I did with a fourth-year undergraduate who
joined my research group during my doctorate. We looked at the peroxide
reduction capabilities of sulfur, selenium, and tellurium analogues of
the ethoxyquin molecule. Interestingly, the barrier for reaction
decreases with the heavier chalcogens.

-   [Substituent-Controlled Reactivity in the Nazarov Cyclisation of
    Allenyl Vinyl
    Ketones](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/chem.201100519), *Chemistry - A
    European Journal*, 2011

A collaboration I did with an organic synthesis group to help better
understand the reactivity they were observing. I used the quantum theory
of atoms in molecules to characterise their reactive intermediate and
determine why nucleophilic attack occurs preferentially at certain
sites.

-   [Systematic study of the performance of density functional theory
    methods for prediction of energies and geometries of organoselenium
    compounds](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/jp201455f), *Journal of
    Physical Chemistry A*, 2011

A benchmarking study of nine density-functional theory methods and
thirteen basis sets to determine the for modelling organoselenium
compounds. Also known as chapter 4 of my thesis.

-   [Theoretical Investigations on the Reaction of Monosubstituted
    Tertiary-Benzylamine Selenols with Hydrogen
    Peroxide](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/jp105651x), *Journal of Physical
    Chemistry A*, 2010

A follow-up to the paper immediately below, where we added a variety of
electron withdrawing and donating substituents to the phenyl ring of our
molecule to determine their effects on the reaction energy. Also known
as chapter 8 of my thesis.

-   [Reduction of Hydrogen Peroxide by Glutathione Peroxidase Mimics:
    Reaction Mechanism and
    Energetics](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/jp910368u)[, ]{style="line-height: 1.5;"}*Journal
    of Physical Chemistry A*[, 2010]{style="line-height: 1.5;"}

An examination of the first, of three, steps in the catalytic cycle I
was examining for the doctoral research. We tested a number of possible
reaction mechanisms and forms of the proposed organoselenium
antioxidant. Also known as chapter 5 of my thesis.

-   [Maple-Assisted Template for Automatic Calculation of Second Order
    AA'XX' NMR
    Spectra](http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ed085p1707.2), *Journal of
    Chemical Education*, 2008

This was a project I worked on in the final year of my B.Sc. with my
physical chemistry professor. We developed a
[Maple](http://www.maplesoft.com/products/Maple/) worksheet to predict
the line structure of AA'XX' NMR spectra, as you would find for
molecules like thiophene. It is intended to be used to assist
undergraduate chemistry students in understanding these second order
spectra.
